New chapter "Metropolis" with Python Implementation (#929)
algorithm-archivists/algorithm-archive: contents/metropolis/metropolis.md

# Metropolis Algorithm

The [Monte Carlo Integration](../monte_carlo_integration/monte_carlo_integration.html) method uses random numbers to approximate the area of pretty much any shape we choose. The Metropolis algorithm {{ "metropolis1953equation" | cite }} is a slightly more advanced Monte Carlo method which uses random numbers to approximate a probability distribution. What's really powerful about this approach is that you don't need to know the probability function itself - you just need a function which is _proportional_ to it. 

Why is this helpful? Well, we often have probability functions of the following form:

$$
P(\mathbf{x}) = \frac{f(\mathbf{x})}{\int_D f(\mathbf{x})d\mathbf{x}}
$$

> where $$D$$ is the domain of $$P(\mathbf{x})$$, i.e., all possible values of the coordinates $$\mathbf{x}$$ for which $$P(\mathbf{x})$$ is defined. 

Author: I think your comments are all good points, and I realize now that my introduction kind of blows. It is rushed, and assumes a lot of background from the reader. I think the way to make the intro better would be:

1. Add a subsection answering the question "What is a probability density function?" which would cover normalization and why normalization is difficult, with an example.
2. An "Applications" subsection which covers certain application areas like creating a Boltzmann distribution (or just distribution) of a system of particles. A good opportunity to cite more papers here too!

It's often easy for us to know $$f(x)$$. But the integral in the denominator can be quite difficult to calculate, even numerically.

> This is especially true when the coordinates ($$\mathbf{x}$$) are multidimensional, and $$f(\mathbf{x})$$ is an expensive calculation. One example use case is a multidimensional physical system with energy $$E(\mathbf{x})$$, for which we know that $$f(x) = e^{-E(\mathbf{x})}$$, but $$P(x)$$ is almost always impossible to calculate. 

Author: I'm providing a Gaussian example, as well as an entire section for application :)

    * If $$ u \leq A $$, then __accept__ move, and set new position, $$x_{t+1} = x' $$
    * Otherwise, __reject__ move, and set new position to current, $$x_{t+1} = x_t $$
4. Increment $$t \rightarrow t + 1$$ and repeat from step 1.

The code for steps 1 to 3 is:

{% method %}
{% sample lang="py" %}
[import:19-31, lang:"python"](code/python/metropolis.py)
{% endmethod %}

The following plot shows the result of running the algorithm for different numbers of iterations ($$N$$), with the same initial position. The histograms are normalized so that they integrate to 1. We can see the convergence toward $$P(x)$$ as we increase $$N$$.

<p>
	<img class="center" src="res/multiple_histograms.png" alt="<FIG> multiple histograms" style="width:80%"/>
</p>

## Example Code
The following code puts everything together, and runs Metropolis algorithm for $$N$$ steps. All the positions visited by the algorithm are then written to a file, which can be later read and fed into a histogram or other density calculating scheme. 

{% method %}
{% sample lang="py" %}
[import, lang:"python"](code/python/metropolis.py)
{% endmethod %}

## Things to consider 

> ### Any symmetric function can be used to generate the step

Reviewer: I think this entire paragraph is really important and should be moved up before the example code to where you talk about the definition of `g()`

So far the function $$g$$ we used for  generating the next step is a random number in the interval $$(-1,1)$$. However, this can be any function symmetric about $$0$$ for the above algorithm to work. For example, it can be a number randomly from a list of numbers like $$[ -3, -1, -1, +1, +1, +3]$$. In higher dimensions, the function should be symmetric in all directions, such as multidimensional Gaussian function. However, the choice of $$g$$ can affect how quickly the target distribution is achieved. The optimal choice for $$g$$ is not a trivial problem, and depends on the nature of the target distribution, and what you're interested in.

> ### A runaway walker

Reviewer: I don't know if I fully understand this section. Maybe a visualization would help?

Also: it might be a good idea to move this above the example code?

> # Metropolis Algorithm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# The Metropolis Algorithm
```

The [Monte Carlo Integration](../monte_carlo_integration/monte_carlo_integration.html) method uses random numbers to approximate the area of pretty much any shape we choose. 

> The Metropolis algorithm {{ "metropolis1953equation" | cite }} is a slightly more advanced Monte Carlo method which uses random numbers to approximate a [probability distribution](../probability/distributions/distributions.md).
> 
> Here we will use the Metropolis algorithm to approximate a __probability density function__, as described in [this chapter](../probability/distributions/distributions.md), which is of the form,
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Metropolis algorithm {{ "metropolis1953equation" | cite }} is a slightly more advanced Monte Carlo method which uses random numbers to approximate a [probability distribution](../probability/distributions/distributions.md):

```

$$
P(\mathbf{x}) = \frac{f(\mathbf{x})}{\displaystyle\int_D f(\mathbf{x})d\mathbf{x}}
$$

where $$D$$ is the domain of $$P(\mathbf{x})$$, i.e., all possible values of the $$\mathbf{x}$$ for which $$P(\mathbf{x})$$ is defined; 

> and $$f(\mathbf{x})$$ is some a function that is proportional to $$P(x)$$, such as a frequency distribution of $$\mathbf{x}$$. 

Reviewer: Again, not super clear on what a "frequency distribution" is. Maybe saying "such as the likelihood of particular outcomes in a game of chance."

Reviewer: It might be nice to explicitly mention that the denominator is normalizing the function?

A one-dimensional example is the __normal distribution__, or __Gaussian distribution__, given by

$$
P(x) = \frac{e^{-x^2}}{\displaystyle\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} e^{-x^2} dx} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{\pi}} e^{-x^2}
$$

In practice, it's often easy for us to know $$f(x)$$, but the integral in the denominator can be quite difficult to calculate, even numerically. 
This is especially true when the coordinates ($$\mathbf{x}$$) are multidimensional, and $$f(\mathbf{x})$$ is an expensive calculation, as we shall see in the examples below.

## An  example application

>  One example of a complicated probability function arises when considering a physical system of $$N$$ number of particles. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One example of a complicated probability function arises when considering a physical system of $$N$$ particles. 
```

Almost always, no analytical solution exists to the integral in $$Q$$, and the numerical integration is unfeasible. 

To see that $$Q$$ is unfeasible to calculate, imagine there are just 10 particles which all exist in a 1D world, restricted to a line segment.

<p>
	<img class="center" src="res/1D_particles.png" style="width:100%" alt="<FIG> 1D particles">
</p>

This means that the energy $$E(\mathbf{x})$$ of the system is a 10D function, as there are 10 coordinates in total. 
Now imagine that we divide the 1D line segment into only 50 different intervals, allowing each particle to take on 50 different positions. 
This is equivalent to dividing the length of a football field into intervals of about 2 meters - not a resolution you'd wanna watch a game in! 
Even with such poor resolution, the number of different combinations of positions is $$10^{50}$$ - a colossal number indeed. 
To see how large this number is, imagine that a single computation of $$E(\mathbf{x})$$ took only 1 nanosecond on a single processor, which is much faster than most energy calculations for physical systems in practice.

>  With that speed, it would require $$10^{41}$$ seconds on a single processor to calculate $$Q$$ - which means that _even_ with all the processors in the world running in parallel (there could be billions or trillions of them), calculating $$Q$$ would still take longer than the age of the universe - by many orders of magnitude!

Reviewer: I don't know if I buy this. We are giving each of the 10 points in space 50 possible positions to exist in. That might be 10^50 permutations, but it's not clear to me why you need to use every permutation for calculating Q. To me, it seems like you have 10 separate 1D coordinates, not a 10D space, unless there are some weird interaction terms with the particles?

This might make sense, but would be way clearer with a direct expression for Q.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 With that speed, it would require $$10^{41}$$ seconds on a single processor to calculate $$Q$$, which means that _even_ with all the processors in the world running in parallel (there could be billions or trillions of them), calculating $$Q$$ would still take longer than the age of the universe by many orders of magnitude!
```

What's really powerful about the Metropolis approach is that you don't need to know the probability function itself - you just need a function which is _proportional_ to it. 

> What this means for the Botlzmann distribution is that you only need to know the term,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What this means for the Boltzmann distribution is that you only need to know the term,
```

$$
f(\mathbf{x}) = \exp\left[{\displaystyle\frac{-E(\mathbf{x})}{T} } \right]
$$

> And the Metropolis algorithm can bypass calculation of $$Q$$ altogether and use $$f(x)$$ to generate a distribution of $$x$$ which follows the probability density $$P(x)$$. 

Reviewer: This is possible because $$Q$$ is essentially just a normalization factor, so finding some other way to evaluate f and doing the normalization after-the-fact can eliminate the Q calculation entirely.

I think it's important to explicitly mention this

> In other words, it can sample values of $$x$$ in such away that the probability of sampling $$x$$ will follow the actual distribution $$P(x)$$ - the more likely a value of $$x$$ is according to $$P(x)$$, the more likely it will be sampled by the Metropolis algorithm. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In other words, it can sample values of $$x$$ in such away that the probability of sampling $$x$$ will follow the actual distribution $$P(x)$$. 
```

This fact dramatically reduces the number of samples needed to approximate the probability distribution.

Of course to be truly proportional to $$P(x)$$ the Metropolis algorithm would still take some time before it converges - but it scales very well with the dimensionality of $$\mathbf{x}$$, which in this case is proportional to the number of particles in the system, which can get very large in practice. 
Furthermore, we often don't care about the _entire_ space of possibilities. 
We usually care about a local region of $$P(x)$$, where the probability is relatively high, and so you would have "realistic" positions for the particles (it turns out reality tries to exist in a high probability state, who would've guessed?). 

> Because the Metropolis algorithm tends toward high probability regions, it's good at sampling those regions and providing us with a realistic collection of systems.

Reviewer: I almost feel like we could completely remove this paragraph without any loss to the chapter. Maybe the main point was a bit too confusing?

Finally, the Metropolis algorithm can be modified or implemented in other algorithms, and forms the basis of many advanced sampling algorithms. 
The most popular is probably the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm {{ "hastings1970monte" | cite }} which is fundamentally the same. 

> Other algorithms that implement the algorithm are Metropolis-adjusted Langevin algorithm {{ "mala_wiki" | cite }}, and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo {{ "hmc_wiki" | cite }}, to name a few. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some other algorithms that use this method are Metropolis-adjusted Langevin algorithm {{ "mala_wiki" | cite }}, and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo {{ "hmc_wiki" | cite }}, to name a few. 
```

# The Metropolis Algorithm

The [Monte Carlo Integration](../monte_carlo_integration/monte_carlo_integration.html) method uses random numbers to approximate the area of pretty much any shape we choose. 
The Metropolis algorithm {{ "metropolis1953equation" | cite }} is a slightly more advanced Monte Carlo method which uses random numbers to approximate a [probability distribution](../probability/distributions/distributions.md):

$$

> P(\mathbf{x}) = \frac{f(\mathbf{x})}{\displaystyle\int_D f(\mathbf{x})d\mathbf{x}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
P(\mathbf{x}) = \frac{f(\mathbf{x})}{\displaystyle\int_D f(\mathbf{x})d\mathbf{x}},
```

$$

where $$D$$ is the domain of $$P(\mathbf{x})$$, i.e., all possible values of the $$\mathbf{x}$$ for which $$P(\mathbf{x})$$ is defined; 
and $$f(\mathbf{x})$$ is some a function that is proportional to $$P(x)$$, such as a statistical frequency distribution, i.e., one that counts the number of occurences of each $$\mathbf{x}$$.
The integral in the denominator is the __normalization factor__ which ensures that the sum of all probabilities is unity, i.e.,
$$

> \int_D P(\mathbf{x}) d\mathbf{x} = 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\int_D P(\mathbf{x}) d\mathbf{x} = 1.
```

$$
A one-dimensional example is the __normal distribution__, or __Gaussian distribution__, given by

$$

> P(x) = \frac{e^{-x^2}}{\displaystyle\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} e^{-x^2} dx} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{\pi}} e^{-x^2}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
P(x) = \frac{e^{-x^2}}{\displaystyle\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} e^{-x^2} dx} = \frac{1}{\sqrt{\pi}} e^{-x^2}.
```

$$

In practice, it's often easy for us to know $$f(x)$$, but the integral in the denominator can be quite difficult to calculate, even numerically. 
This is especially true when the coordinates ($$\mathbf{x}$$) are multidimensional, and $$f(\mathbf{x})$$ is an expensive calculation, as we shall see in the examples below.

## An  example application

One example of a complicated probability function arises when considering a physical system of $$N$$ particles. 
These could be atoms, molecules, or even star systems! 
For such systems, we can usually describe the __potential energy__ {{ "potential_energy_wiki" | cite }} of the system as a function of the coordinates of all particles, $$\mathbf{x}$$,

$$

> E(\mathbf{x}) = E(x_1, y_1, z_1, x_2, y_2, z_2, ... ,x_N, y_N, z_N) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
E(\mathbf{x}) = E(x_1, y_1, z_1, x_2, y_2, z_2, ... ,x_N, y_N, z_N),
```

$$

where $$x_i, y_i, z_i$$ are the spatial coordinates of particle $$i$$. 

> So altogether there are $$3N$$ coordinates - making $$E(\mathbf{x})$$ a $$3N$$ dimensional function, which can be a computationally intensive calculation on it's own. But it doesn't end there!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So altogether there are $$3N$$ coordinates &ndash; making $$E(\mathbf{x})$$ a $$3N$$ dimensional function, which can be a computationally intensive calculation on it's own. But it doesn't end there!
```

The physicist Ludwig Boltzmann {{ "ludwig_boltzmann_wiki" | cite }} discovered that when such a system is in equilibrium at some temperature $$T$$, you can describe the probability density of the system for any set of coordinates $$\mathbf{x}$$ using, {{ "boltzmann_distribution_wiki" | cite }} 

$$

> P(\mathbf{x}) = \frac{\displaystyle \exp\left[{\displaystyle\frac{-E(\mathbf{x})}{T} } \right]} {Q}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
P(\mathbf{x}) = \frac{\displaystyle \exp\left[{\displaystyle\frac{-E(\mathbf{x})}{T} } \right]} {Q},
```

$$

where the numerator is called the __Boltzmann factor__, and $$Q$$ is the [normalization constant](../probability/distributions/distributions.md),

$$

> Q = \int_D \exp\left[{\displaystyle\frac{-E(\mathbf{x})}{T} } \right] d\mathbf{x}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Q = \int_D \exp\left[{\displaystyle\frac{-E(\mathbf{x})}{T} } \right] d\mathbf{x}.
```

$$

We can see now that the probability density function is a difficult calculation, particularly because of $$Q$$. 
Almost always, no analytical solution exists to the integral in $$Q$$, and the numerical integration is unfeasible. 

To see that $$Q$$ is unfeasible to calculate, imagine there are just 10 particles which all exist in a 1D world, restricted to a line segment.

<p>
	<img class="center" src="res/1D_particles.png" style="width:100%" alt="<FIG> 1D particles">
</p>

Let's assume that the particles _interact_, meaning that the position of one particle affects that of another. 
This could be the case, for example, if all the particles were charged, and so they would be repelling or attracting each other. 
This means that the energy $$E(\mathbf{x}) = E(x_1,...,x_{10})$$ of the system is a 10D function, and it would not be possible to simplify it any further due to the interactions. 

> Thus, the Boltzmann factor, $$\exp\left[-E(\mathbf{x})/T\right]$$, is also a 10D function. And so, to calculate $$Q$$, we would have to integrate the Boltzmann factor 10 times, one for each coordinate,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Thus, the Boltzmann factor, $$\exp\left[-E(\mathbf{x})/T\right]$$, is also a 10D function. To calculate $$Q$$, we would have to integrate the Boltzmann factor 10 times, one for each coordinate,
```

$$

> Q = \int_{x_1} \dots \int_{x_{10}} \exp\left[\frac{-E(x_1,\dots x_{10})}{T}\right]\ dx_1\dots dx_{10}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Q = \int_{x_1} \dots \int_{x_{10}} \exp\left[\frac{-E(x_1,\dots x_{10})}{T}\right]\ dx_1\dots dx_{10}.
```

$$
 
In most cases, there is no known analytical expression for the above integral, so it has to be done numerically.
To do so, imagine that we divide the 1D line segment into only 50 different intervals, allowing each particle to take on 50 different positions. 
This is equivalent to dividing the length of a football field into intervals of about 2 meters - not a resolution you'd wanna watch a game in! 

> Even with such poor resolution, the number of different combinations of positions is $$10^{50}$$ - a colossal number indeed. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even with such poor resolution, the number of different combinations of positions is $$10^{50}$$ &ndash; a colossal number indeed. 
```

To see how large this number is, imagine that a single computation of $$E(\mathbf{x})$$ took only 1 nanosecond on a single processor, which is much faster than most energy calculations for physical systems in practice.
 With that speed, it would require $$10^{41}$$ seconds on a single processor to calculate $$Q$$ - which means that _even_ with all the processors in the world running in parallel (there could be billions or trillions of them), calculating $$Q$$ would still take longer than the age of the universe - by many orders of magnitude!

> What's really powerful about the Metropolis approach is that you don't need to know the probability function itself - you just need a function which is _proportional_ to it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What's really powerful about the Metropolis approach is that you don't need to know the probability function itself.
Instead, you just need a function which is _proportional_ to it. 
```

What this means for the Boltzmann distribution is that you only need to know the term,

$$

> f(\mathbf{x}) = \exp\left[{\displaystyle\frac{-E(\mathbf{x})}{T} } \right]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
f(\mathbf{x}) = \exp\left[{\displaystyle\frac{-E(\mathbf{x})}{T} } \right].
```

$$

> The Metropolis algorithm can bypass calculation of $$Q$$ altogether and use $$f(x)$$ to generate a distribution of $$x$$ which follows the probability density $$P(x)$$. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Metropolis algorithm can bypass the calculation of $$Q$$ altogether and use $$f(x)$$ to generate a distribution of $$x$$ which follows the probability density $$P(x)$$. 
```

In other words, it can sample values of $$x$$ in such away that the probability of sampling $$x$$ will follow the actual distribution $$P(x)$$. 
Thus, if Metropolis was used to sample from $$x$$, the number of occurences of $$x$$ would be proportional to $$P(x)$$.
Numerical normalization can then be done by using the total number of samples instead of performing an integration. 
This fact dramatically reduces the number of calculations needed to approximate the probability distribution.

> Finally, the Metropolis algorithm can be modified or implemented in other algorithms, and forms the basis of many advanced sampling algorithms. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, the Metropolis algorithm can be modified or implemented in other methods, and forms the basis of many advanced sampling algorithms. 
```

In other words, it can sample values of $$x$$ in such away that the probability of sampling $$x$$ will follow the actual distribution $$P(x)$$. 
Thus, if Metropolis was used to sample from $$x$$, the number of occurences of $$x$$ would be proportional to $$P(x)$$.
Numerical normalization can then be done by using the total number of samples instead of performing an integration. 
This fact dramatically reduces the number of calculations needed to approximate the probability distribution.

Finally, the Metropolis algorithm can be modified or implemented in other methods, and forms the basis of many advanced sampling algorithms. 
The most popular is probably the Metropolis-Hastings algorithm {{ "hastings1970monte" | cite }} which is fundamentally the same. 
Some other algorithms that use this method are Metropolis-adjusted Langevin algorithm {{ "mala_wiki" | cite }}, and Hamiltonian Monte Carlo {{ "hmc_wiki" | cite }}, to name a few. 
They are often used for physical systems that follow a Boltzmann distribution.

## A Random Walk in One Dimension

In the rest of this chapter, we will look at $$1$$D examples to understand the Metropolis algorithm. 

> Although the algorithm is not particularly efficient in just one dimension, it is much easier to understand and learn how to implement than in higher dimensions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although the algorithm is not particularly efficient in just one dimension, it is much easier to understand in one dimension than in multiple dimensions. 
```

Otherwise, it will be accepted with a probability of $$f(x') / f(x_t)$$. 
If we create a histogram of this walk for some arbitrary target function $$P(x)$$, we can see from the figure below that the frequency starts to look very much like it after many iterations! 

<div style="text-align:center">
<video style="width:80%" controls loop>
  <source src="res/animated_metropolis.mp4" type="video/mp4">
Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>
</div>

Although convergence occurs eventually, not all parts of the distribution achieve convergence quickly. 
Note from the animation above, that the walker very quickly replicates the distribution of the two peaks on the left, but takes quite a while to even reach the third peak to the right. 
This is because there is a long "barrier" of low probability region between the third peak and second peak. 
This may not necessarily be a bad thing &ndash; sometimes one might want to estimate how long something takes to transition from one state to another, and often these peaks represent such 'states'. 
So averaging over many metropolis runs may give some estimate of these transition times. 

> And if global sampling is the goal, the process of exploration could be sped up by choosing larger step sizes for the walker, for example by choosing step size $$g$$ from an interval like $$(-3,3)$$ instead of $$(-1,1)$$. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If global sampling is the goal, the process of exploration could be sped up by choosing larger step sizes for the walker, for example by choosing step size $$g$$ from an interval like $$(-3,3)$$ instead of $$(-1,1)$$. 
```

## The Algorithm for a One Dimensional Example

> 

Reviewer: There should be a comment here introducing the upcoming sections

Author: Couldn't come up with anything other than the line (147) below. Feel free to throw in some suggestions.

### The Initial Setup

Let our target distribution be
$$
P(x) = \frac{f(x)}{\int_{-10}^{10} f(x)},
$$

> where $$f(x)$$ is the function we know and is given by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where $$f(x)$$ is the same function we have shown above and is given by
```

$$
f(x) = 10e^{-4(x+4)^2} + 3e^{-0.2(x+1)^2} + e^{-2(x-5)^2}.
$$

The code for defining this function is given below.

{% method %}
{% sample lang="py" %}
[import:4-18, lang:"python"](code/python/metropolis.py)
{% endmethod %}

Since this is an easy function to integrate, and hence get our target distribution $$P(x)$$ directly,  we can use it to verify the Metropolis algorithm. 
The plot of $$P(x)$$ in the figure below shows three different peaks of varying width and height, with some overlap as well.

<p>
	<img class="center" src="res/plot_of_P.png" alt="<FIG> Plot of P(x)" style="width:80%"/>
</p>

Next, we define our walker's symmetric step generating function. 
As in the random walk example, we will use a random real number between $$-1$$ and $$+1$$ as the step size. 

{% method %}
{% sample lang="py" %}
[import:20-22, lang:"python"](code/python/metropolis.py)
{% endmethod %}

However, $$g$$ can be any function symmetric about $$0$$ for the above algorithm to work. 

> For example, it can be a number chosen randomly from a discrete list, such as $$[ -3, -1, -1, +1, +1, +3]$$. 

Reviewer: To be clear: this was meant to have multiple 1's, right?

It can also be a number chosen from a symmetric continuos distribution, like the Gaussian, $$e^{-x^2}$$. 

> In higher dimensions, the function should be spherically symmetric, such as multidimensional Gaussian function, $$e^{-(x^2 +y^2 + ...)}$$. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In higher dimensions, the function should be spherically symmetric, such as a multidimensional Gaussian function, $$e^{-(x^2 +y^2 + ...)}$$. 
```

{% endmethod %}

### How to Iterate 

1. Generate new proposed position $$x' = x_t + g$$.
2. Calculate the acceptance probability, 
$$
A = \min\left(1, \frac{f(x')}{f(x_t)}\right).
$$
3. Accept proposal, $$x'$$ with probability $$A$$. If your programming language doesn't have a built-in method for this,
	* Generate a random number $$u$$ between $$0$$ and $$1$$.
    * If $$ u \leq A $$, then __accept__ move, and set new position, $$x_{t+1} = x' $$.
    * Otherwise, __reject__ move, and set new position to current, $$x_{t+1} = x_t $$.
4. Increment $$t \rightarrow t + 1$$ and repeat from step 1.

The code for steps 1 to 3 is:

{% method %}
{% sample lang="py" %}
[import:34-42, lang:"python"](code/python/metropolis.py)
{% endmethod %}

The following plot shows the result of running the algorithm for different numbers of iterations ($$N$$), with the same initial position. 
The histograms are normalized so that they integrate to $$1$$. 
We can see the convergence toward $$P(x)$$ as we increase $$N$$.

<p>
	<img class="center" src="res/multiple_histograms.png" alt="<FIG> multiple histograms" style="width:80%"/>
</p>

## Example Code

> The following code puts everything together, and runs Metropolis algorithm for a number of  steps given by `num_steps`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following code puts everything together, and runs the Metropolis algorithm for a number of  steps given by `num_steps`. 
```

# The Metropolis Algorithm

The [Monte Carlo Integration](../monte_carlo_integration/monte_carlo_integration.html) method uses random numbers to approximate the area of pretty much any shape we choose. 
The Metropolis algorithm {{ "metropolis1953equation" | cite }} is a slightly more advanced Monte Carlo method which uses random numbers to approximate a [probability distribution](../probability/distributions/distributions.md):

$$
P(\mathbf{x}) = \frac{f(\mathbf{x})}{\displaystyle\int_D f(\mathbf{x})d\mathbf{x}},
$$

> where $$D$$ is the domain of $$P(\mathbf{x})$$, i.e., all possible values of the $$\mathbf{x}$$ for which $$P(\mathbf{x})$$ is defined; 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where $$D$$ is the domain of $$P(\mathbf{x})$$, i.e., all possible values of the $$\mathbf{x}$$ for which $$P(\mathbf{x})$$ is defined.
```

I think this is a long run-on sentence

> and $$f(\mathbf{x})$$ is some a function that is proportional to $$P(x)$$, such as a statistical frequency distribution, i.e., one that counts the number of occurences of each $$\mathbf{x}$$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$$f(\mathbf{x})$$ is a function that is proportional to $$P(x)$$, such as a statistical frequency distribution which counts the number of occurences of each $$\mathbf{x}$$.
```

lots of i.e.s

To understand how this works, let's call $$x_t$$ the position before the step, and $$x'$$ the position after it. 
We then define the probability of __accepting the step__ to be

$$
A = \min \left(\frac{f(x')}{f(x_t)}, 1\right).
$$

The $$\min$$ function above implies that $$A=1$$ if $$f(x') \gt f(x_t)$$, which means that the move will __always__ be accepted if it is toward a higher probability position. 
Otherwise, it will be accepted with a probability of $$f(x') / f(x_t)$$. 
If we create a histogram of this walk for some arbitrary target function $$P(x)$$, we can see from the figure below that the frequency starts to look very much like it after many iterations! 

<div style="text-align:center">
<video style="width:80%" controls loop>
  <source src="res/animated_metropolis.mp4" type="video/mp4">
Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>
</div>

Although convergence occurs eventually, not all parts of the distribution achieve convergence quickly. 
Note from the animation above, that the walker very quickly replicates the distribution of the two peaks on the left, but takes quite a while to even reach the third peak to the right. 

> This is because there is a long "barrier" of low probability region between the third peak and second peak. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is because there is a long low probability region between the third peak and second peak that acts as a "barrier." 
```

For example, it can be a number chosen randomly from a discrete list, such as $$[ -3, -1, -1, +1, +1, +3]$$. 
It can also be a number chosen from a symmetric continuos distribution, like the Gaussian, $$e^{-x^2}$$. 
In higher dimensions, the function should be spherically symmetric, such as a multidimensional Gaussian function, $$e^{-(x^2 +y^2 + ...)}$$. 
Whatever function you choose, there are at least a couple of things to note:
1. If the function $$g$$ is discrete, you will only sample discrete values. 
For example, if $$g$$ returns only $$-1$$ or $$+1$$, and nothing in between, you will sample only integer steps away from the initial $$x_0$$. 
2. The average step size really matters! 
A small step-size means the walker will carefully sample nearby regions more, but will walk more slowly, so might not be good at exploring far and wide. 
On the other hand, a walker with a large step size may not sample nearby regions accurately &ndash; and actually has a higher chance of being rejected if the walker is already in a high probability region, since the acceptance ratio is more drastic for large steps. 
The effect of step-size on the walker's efficiency is far from obvious! 

> How to choose $$g$$ is in itself a research field and depends on what the goal of the sampling is. 

Author: ```suggestion
The question of how to choose an optimal $$g$$ is a research area on its own, and depends largely on what the goal of the sampling is.
```

> How to choose $$g$$ is in itself a research field and depends on what the goal of the sampling is. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How to choose $$g$$ is in itself a research field and depends on what the goal of the sampling is. 
```
```suggestion
How to choose $$g$$ is, itself, a research field and depends on what the goal of the sampling is. 
```

> Some methods even use an "adaptive" method where $$g$$ is "trained" on-the-fly using a learning algorithm! 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some techniques even use an "adaptive" method where $$g$$ is "trained" on-the-fly using a learning algorithm! 
```

Some of these methods and others are discussed in Ref. {{ "rosenthal2011optimal" | cite }} and Ref. {{ "gareth2001optimal" | cite }}. 
In a lot of cases, people just use trial and error, as the algorithm is not too difficult to implement.

After chosing $$g$$, we are almost ready to iterate. 
We just need to choose the domain of $$x$$, and an initial point for $$ x_0 $$ ($$x_t$$ at $$t = 0$$) chosen randomly from the domain of $$x$$.

{% method %}
{% sample lang="py" %}
[import:70-71, lang:"python"](code/python/metropolis.py)
{% endmethod %}

### How to Iterate 

1. Generate new proposed position $$x' = x_t + g$$.
2. Calculate the acceptance probability, 
$$
A = \min\left(1, \frac{f(x')}{f(x_t)}\right).
$$
3. Accept proposal, $$x'$$ with probability $$A$$. If your programming language doesn't have a built-in method for this,
	* Generate a random number $$u$$ between $$0$$ and $$1$$.
    * If $$ u \leq A $$, then __accept__ move, and set new position, $$x_{t+1} = x' $$.

>     * Otherwise, __reject__ move, and set new position to current, $$x_{t+1} = x_t $$.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Otherwise, __reject__ move, and set new position to current position, $$x_{t+1} = x_t $$.
```
